[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i am here with somebody
who i think you guys are going to have
your minds blown by vuci tembeo vuci
welcome to the show man i am beyond
excited to spend this time with you
brother bill you this is incredible it's
a dream come true thanks for having me
dude for sure so in researching you man
i really had my mind blown
i am
very impressed with your ability to
generate success even in a system that
you could argue is pretty
problematic possibly even broken and yet
you've had this extraordinary level of
success watching your father killed in
front of you when you were 13
having to drop out of college at one
point because you couldn't afford it um
growing up and starting a business as a
black man in
recently
just out of apartheid south africa i
mean these are pretty hardcore
circumstances and yet you sit here as
somebody who has had extraordinary
success
so
given that people often reach for that
excuse of
the world's against me
you know the system is set up to see me
fail what is it about you or the way
that you think that has allowed you to
be successful despite all of that
madness
i think um
so i live by two core principles right
the first is that everything everyone
knows they learned
and i don't accept that i'm less
intelligent than the next person which
means i can learn it too right
the second is that every single excuse i
have is valid
but that's still not going to give me
the results that i want
and so we do live in this really uh
pc culture today
um
where people are looking for the excuse
and the truth is the excuse is
completely valid
yes you are a young black person growing
up in democratic south africa for the
past 26 years but for hundreds of years
before that it wasn't built for you to
succeed
right yes you're living in one of the
most difficult credit capital markets in
the world so it's hard to get access to
funding to start a business yeah all of
that stuff's true but that's still not
going to change your circumstance
so so
the test is not whether or not you know
the the reasons for not succeeding the
test is whether or not you're willing to
do whatever it takes
to get to that next level and a big part
of the whatever it takes actually is
just remain teachable just
just be a student student of the game a
student of life a student of those
who've achieved
um and i've found that those two things
have really stood me in good stead
dude what you said about excuses being
valid i think that's really important
for people to understand i've always
said that the most sinister thing about
excuses is that they're real like you
really do have reasons not to be
successful but now what like now what
now what are you gonna do like um i
remember i was giving a talk um at
google and one of the guys happened to
be african-american and he said tom do
you think it's harder for me as a black
person in america to succeed and i said
that seems patently self-evident even
even just accepting that humans tend to
gravitate towards those that look like
them what i call the school of fish
phenomenon you always see the same kind
of fish with the same kind of fish so
being a minority just by definition is
going to make things harder
but now what like now you can take that
excuse and
give yourself an out to not try to not
get started which is something you talk
a lot about or you can say
regardless of that i'm going to do
whatever it takes to get where i want to
go now how do you how have you vuci
cultivated that mentality when your
father was killed easy moment to give up
to turn to violence to be angry to be
bitter when you had to drop out of
school a reason again to just be angry
to be bitter
what what are you telling yourself that
allows you to go okay cool this is my
circumstance but i know what i want
so first just to make the admission that
i do get pissed and i'm very real and
raw at that emotion right so i
i i recognize the imbalance that the
world we live in has
but i also recognize that those
imbalances are man-made tom
and they were they were created by
people who precede us
who had a particular view of the world
and um
and my role is to shift people's views
and perspective right so that's
literally what i do when i'm on a
platform i'm just there to help you see
the world differently than how you've
seen it before that's it
what are some of the key attributes to
that so you gave us one which is excuses
are valid so what what are some other
core tenets
yeah so the first one is your excuses
are valid the second one is your reality
is your reality you're not imagining it
you're not imagining that you're poor
you're not imagining that you're left
out because you live in a third world
country you're not imagining that you're
not getting the right quality of
education to make you globally
competitive you're not imagining that
that's it's real
right okay but now that you've got it
you can live in the emotion and
sometimes i do i get really really mad
and really really upset
but then the following morning comes and
you realize that you've moved not an
inch of distance yet you've expanded all
of this time and this emotion i mean
right now if you think about the world
we live in just think about how much
hatred there is think about how much
anger there is
and yet we're not moving
so
i what really pulls me out of it and
it's an honest conversation with me is i
go do you want the emotion or do you
want progress because you can't have
both oh [__] right go go deeper on that
that's crazy just gave me the chills
i'll give you an example you're at the
gym
right you're curling
your rep 8 and your body starts to fire
off those signals in your brain and it
goes stop it hurts
if you stop you get the emotion you
don't get the progress so if you talk to
any decent athlete they'll tell you that
where the pain stop starts is when the
work starts right
talk to any decent entrepreneur that's
built a large-scale business they'll
tell you the [__] they had to go through
so you either get the emotion or you get
the progress but you can't have both
right we're living in this world today
where everybody is just so deeply
embedded in the emotion i want to be
angry at tom because he's x y and z and
i want to be angry at varsity because
yeah
yet you make no progress
so yours in my challenge i think as a
generation is how do we give the world
progress
and and finally
you asked me so the question around so
how do you get over that right so here's
the final bit is i recognize that my
generation has it the easiest like i
think we forget actually that our
generation probably has it the easiest
in the history of homo sapiens on this
little rock called planet earth
in my generation tom if i say something
that's politically incorrect i might
trend on
twitter if my grandfather said something
politically incorrect he would have been
killed or landed up in jail so
so sometimes we've we've lost a sense of
perspective right around it's not easy
but
damn it's much easier than it's ever
been
and and you have a responsibility to own
your progress you can either own the
emotional progress but you don't get
both
dude so if i i am willing to take up
that mantle with you and say that our
obligation is to help people progress
this is exactly why when lisa and i um
exited our last company we didn't just
retire we wanted to double down
and do something that really mattered
and a lot of
i'll say that the very animus the thing
that animates me and keeps me going is
having worked in the inner cities and
seeing that there were these
extraordinary people
um meaning meaning that they they could
become extraordinary right they had all
the raw materials but they were never
going to because they didn't know how to
progress to use your language and so we
thought okay this really is teachable
going back to your point about this
stuff is man-made so if if we can make
this world then we can certainly make a
different world
if i'm prepared to take up that mantle
what is it that i actually need to do
what is it i need to convince people of
what are the actions i need to take um i
know that you're really focused on
education but what are you actually
trying to teach like how do people
make progress
so whoo
see this is why i'm a fan of the show is
because the questions you ask damn how
did tom go there so um
the hardest thing to do is to is to
enable people to see themselves as they
are
not as they hoped they were
not as they've been taught they are but
as they actually are
it's the single hardest thing to do and
i'll tell you why
because we're all embedded in this
construct of a thing called identity
right
and so and what people forget is
identity by its very nature one is
man-made and two is exclusive what that
means is the minute i say i'm male it
means i'm not female if i say i'm black
it means i'm not white
if i say i'm african it means i'm not
american
if i say i am you know educated it means
i'm not illiterate so all the little
words we use to construct identity put
us in a box they don't free us
right
and it's something people i think don't
think about because people today have
assumed an identity for who they are
and it's all over right it's in the
media it's on social media it's on tv
it's in the newspapers it's in in music
videos all you're being sold is an
identity this is what
you should be based on where you come
from and based on how you've been
socialized
very early on my father taught me that i
didn't have to be what society told me
right that i could be different if i
want to i want to put that in context
and see if i'm understanding what you're
saying so
um i read nelson mandela's long walk to
freedom it [__] with me dude that book
is so good
like when every second i think i'm a
badass and then i remember that the man
faced 27 years in prison and refused to
compromise his principles i'm just not
that hardcore
and yeah like so that [__] is phenomenal
and i remember him saying in the book he
was like
this this is nelson mandela talking he
said i got on an airplane and the pilot
was black and for a minute i was scared
because i didn't think black people
could fly a plane and he was like what
the [__] like how do i think that and he
said if that had seeped into my mind
identity right then
how many other people had accepted
something less than who they were
because of what society had told them is
that what you mean that we're sort of
subtly taking on these i can't i can't i
can't
exactly so um here's a great example i'm
short therefore i can't model
okay i mean it's not it's not
established that short people should
model
but whether you should or whether you
can are very different tests right um
and by the way i approach every little
thing in my life like that like all the
[__] i do i go i shouldn't but it
doesn't mean i can't there's a big
[__] difference so if you're telling
me i shouldn't be in the room you may be
correct it doesn't mean i don't have the
capacity to be in the room i want to
force my way in and i'm going to get to
change your mind so this thing about
identity
i think is so powerful because in
today's world where we've you know we're
no longer demographics we're a
psychographic now there is a kid living
in kuala lumpur who's never been out of
kuala lumpur who sounds like a kid in
brooklyn new york because he's watching
jay-z on on youtube but he so he's
completely immersed in that culture and
he's never left his small little village
right and that's exactly the point is
everything you've been taught you are
somebody taught you that's what you are
now you can keep that identity but again
you can't get the progress and so what a
lot of people do is they hang on to it
right in south africa it um it's often
about gender sometimes it's about tribe
right so what tribe you come from
there's a big generation issue so it's
i'm part of it this generation yeah all
those things are true
but do you want the identity
or do you want the progress because you
can't have both
um i'll tell you just quickly a story so
my dad was the sensei in the dojo right
and i used to train with my dad in the
dojo
and so i asked him one time i was like
how come we get to change belts like i
mean couldn't you teach
the methodology without the belt system
he said two things he said first human
beings are incentive based so you need
something to aim for
but he said the second thing is the
reason we give you a belt is because it
assigns an identity
now it doesn't mean that if your orange
belt you can't take on a brown belt
it's just you embed that in your mind
and you go well he's seen you then
therefore and so one of the things he
said to me one of the things you're
going to have to learn is that real life
doesn't have a belt system so everything
we know and i've learned about identity
is given to us it's a it's a template
that somebody has given you
and you can just choose to run that
script of macros or not man identity is
i think the the linchpin
so i'm going to put my finger on the
most inflammatory thing i've ever heard
you say
and we're just going to go straight
there because i think if people can go
past the emotion and get to what you're
saying there's a breakthrough that
applies to everybody
but the the most inflammatory thing i
ever heard you say is that and i'm
assuming actually i think you were
talking worldwide you will correct me
but you said black people were not ready
for freedom
and i was like oh [__] and shel
there's a guy in america his name is
shelby steele who said the same thing
and i remember i almost like
coughed i could not believe that he was
saying that and your initial reaction is
like what the [__] what are you talking
about
yeah so what were you talking about what
do you mean because i know dude you were
coming from a beautiful place but i have
to imagine when people hear you say that
they freak out what do you mean yeah i
mean i i gotta tell you so there was
that's such an incred that was such an
important moment and statement because
so there was a context within which i
said it and i was giving a master class
as i do
and and i made that statement and
it was probably out on youtube for two
years
as these things are they just they're
kind of bubbling and simmering along
and then somebody went and found it on
youtube clipped that video and put it on
twitter and it just exploded right
so i think the language is important
here
i'm not saying black people don't
deserve freedom i think that's an
important point to make
first of all
freedom isn't something you deserve it's
a god-given right it's like breathing
right so you shouldn't have to justify
why you deserve to be free
and often people that approach that
conversation heard me to say black
people don't deserve freedom and i'm
going no no no
the idea that you deserve it means
there's something you have to do to earn
it which by itself is fallacious there
is nothing you have to do to earn the
right as tom bill you to self-determine
you get to self-determine that's your
human right right
that said
if you accept and we all do
that there have been hundreds of years
of structural
um
uh exclusion
and oppression not only of the black
body but of the black mind most
importantly the black mind nelson
mandela sitting on the plane going holy
[__] there's a black pilot right this is
the father of our democracy himself
being caught in that trap
but he had to be wise enough and smart
enough to step out of that comment in
his head and see that comment in the
context of the moment
so when i'm saying we weren't ready for
freedom what i mean is
we got it
but we haven't freed our minds
right
so what we're doing is we're defaulting
to the reasons and excuses we had
pre-freedom for why we're not doing the
[__] we should be doing in freedom now
so the oldest the oldest most
independent country in africa i think is
ghana
i think and it's probably been
independent for over 60 years right
but if you track the trajectory of where
that country has gone
if you go to a haiti and of course there
are several structural issues around the
relationship haiti has with europe and
with france but if you go to haiti and
if you go to zimbabwe just north of here
so who's zimbabwe going to blame
that's really a question because what
happens is we've put these people in
positions of power and leadership whose
mindset was not in disentangled from the
way things used to be so they bring an
oppressed mind into a freedom construct
then they act like oppressed people and
we wonder why the results are the way
they are
krs-1 said it the most beautiful way in
one of his raps he said
he said as black people we need to be
free people
not freed people
that's it
and
and the point there is
the point of departure is when you're
free you don't find the need to explain
your freedom you just are right
um and so that's where the comment was
coming from was and it was a reflection
was okay so we got it but were we ready
for it are we
using it to the best of its ability this
incredible freedom that we enjoy
are we really being transformative are
we being imaginative are we doing new
great and powerful things are we being a
generation
that our children's children will look
at and go those guys had the right
template they got it right right
or not
and it's a question we have to answer
every single day
yes it is interesting so because of my
experience i think of the same problem
but i don't think of it along racial
lines i think of it along
um
economic is probably the closest thing
so
working in the inner cities i realized
white
hispanic black didn't matter
people had been told things like i
remember one kid coming to me have to be
hispanic and he said my mom told me that
the world does not want to see me
succeed
and i thought what the [__] like i
actually understand why she's saying
that she's trying to say look this is
going to be hard for you um
there are difficulties you will face
that other people will not face and so i
know where she was trying to go it was
like trying to sort of soothe him for
the difficult road ahead but what it
told him was you don't belong in that
room so don't bother don't even try and
so i began to obsess with this notion of
this this is a mindset problem so
generational poverty to me is
not really a question of money it will
manifest as money but it is a question
of mindset it's a question of how to
think so there are minimum requirements
anybody watching you that has any bit of
sense is going to go this guy is so
[__] eloquent for sure his verbal
ability has helped him in life 100 i i
think they're beyond a doubt
but
if
somebody has that latent ability that
doesn't get it trained
they're not going to end up being able
to leverage it as a skill set there's a
guy named jeffrey canada and he was
looking at basically how do you give
people the right mindset to be
successfully grown up in harlem at like
the height of the crack epidemic and
he's just like [__] this is atrocious
and what he realized looking at the data
was what mattered was the number of
words you heard by the age of five and
the ratio of positive words to negative
words because of what it did to the
language centers of your brain and how
you spoke in a job interview or in
trying to communicate to other people
and so he's like this is a very
complicated problem that has a very
simple
like linchpin that if you address that
then everything else tumbles from that
and i'll say that one of those things
isn't just language it's just how you
think about your place in the world your
identity and everything sort of keeps
coming back to that do you agree that
the statement that you made about
being able to make the most of your
freedom
centers around how you conceptualize
yourself and the world
pointedly identity
100 which is why i think the work of our
generation today
really is around forcing us to cons to
reconstruct these very identities we
have if we think about it
we live in a world today where almost
all identities are assumed right so the
idea for instance of masculinity is
assumed all right um the idea of being a
strong zulu man is assumed there is a
there's a script there's a book somebody
wrote that says these are the ways
you've got to be this thing right and
and i didn't get to do the edit i just
got the pdf version right
but i'm saying if i'm living in a world
that is complex and changing
i can't take this pdf script into a new
environment it ain't going to work so i
either get to keep the tradition and the
emotion
or i get progress but i can't do both
right
and you know for me
i really used to resent this because i
would get chastised i'd get mocked i
would get attacked
then i realized that actually i was
giving others the permission to be
themselves too right so and that's the
most empowering thing that you can do
when you choose to step into no man's
land meaning saying the things that
you're saying
the sort of inflammatory things
well so so not only saying the things
that you're saying but allowing yourself
to
um
to be ventilated allowing those thoughts
to be discussed and ventilated by people
right
um
one of the things i had to learn was as
i did it
it was incredible how many other people
came out and said sure
glad you said it because i've been
thinking but i couldn't say it because
you know they they'd lynch me and i was
like wow man so
so so you're we're all aware that the
script doesn't work but none of us are
willing to say it because they're going
to throw us in the proverbial social
media concentration camp well edna son
right i mean that's not progress right
final thing just for you to think about
which is this what's the worst that can
happen well the worst that can happen is
you're wrong then you're educated which
goes back to where we start at the very
beginning right remain teachable so the
worst thing that can happen is you say
something you're wrong somebody picks up
the phone you're educated you grow up
and you mature
um
but i think it's really important i
think this idea of identity is just so
powerful when somebody asks the question
who are you
how do you answer that question right
are you are you the job you have are you
the place you come from are you the
lineage of your of your ancestors are
you the qualifications are you your
geography
who are you right
and i think a lot of us don't really
bother to give that enough thought
i want to go back to this idea of
getting started i think that to your
point about you get educated you're
wrong but you figure out that you're
wrong and now you can take a step
towards being right um it seems to me
that one of the most incredible things
about your journey was just a
willingness to fail in the beginning
which of course you did
why is it you're so hardcore about that
notion of just get started
because the single most important part
of the momentum
equation
is
movement
right so i'll give you an example here's
how i explain this to people
so if you're driving your car and for
some other strange reason you know the
car stalls and you're stuck
right you have one of two things you can
do right and let's imagine you're in a
you know you know cell phone black zone
you can't phone anybody one or two
things you can do sit in the car switch
on your hazards and pray somebody's
gonna come past you that's what we call
the charity approach hi i'm here
i grew up poor i didn't get a good
education help
it completely gives the power to the
person on the other side of the equation
which is the
i feel like i want to help and here's
how much i'm willing to help with all
right flash the hazards
the alternative
is you open the driver's door
you drop the the you drop the hand
you put your shoulder behind the chassis
and you push
now when you start pushing the hardest
part is going to be that initial meter
because the car is completely still it's
got no momentum
so you start pushing and what happens is
five meters down the line 10 meters down
the line assuming the road is flat of
course
all of a sudden you're not pushing as
hard as you were you're just maintaining
momentum
so the reason i always say to people
start is because the hardest part is the
beginning my dad used to say to me
you will always be the worst at
something the first time you do it
so the results you get the first time
you do it are not the true results that
was the worst version of you doing that
thing that's the first time you sing
first time doing public speaking you
know first time you try to do a comedy
set
first time you do anything is the worst
time because you don't have the skill
set
but as you do it what happens is you
mature you get better
and you learn right so that's what i
mean by that is is the reason it's
important to start is because all of
those stories that self-narrative that
you've been saying and toiling in your
head the excuses are valid the world
isn't fair and but guess what at the
beginning it is going to be tough but
the the only way out of it is to start
there is no other way out of it you
can't negotiate with it right it's um i
mean let me just one last thing for you
to think about so i said this to an
entrepreneur literally today who came to
see me about this very thing
and she was saying to me look you know
business it's covered it's been a tough
time yada yada and i said to her i said
you know if you went to imagine you know
the empire state buildings i said to you
if you went to the top of the building
and uh stood at the ledge prayed to
whichever god you praised god buddha
allah
and told him that you don't believe in
gravity
and jumped
you'd find that gravity believes in you
right so so i was saying to
the environment in the moment we're in
is gravity you can't negotiate your way
out of it
right what you can do
is you can get started with who you need
to be to survive this moment and what
she was doing which is what i think a
lot of people do
is they they hang on to who they used to
be
right so i used to be the well that's
not working anymore so who do you need
to be and get started on that journey i
really honestly firmly believe in the
school of starting starting i think is
often more important in the entire
momentum construct than everything that
comes after that
dude your obsession with what works is a
shared obsession i i
you and i think so much alike that it's
scary you may be the closest person in
terms of saying things that like
i've never heard anybody else say that i
i've either said or have had rattling
around in my head for a very long time
um and
that that idea like the thing i want to
scream at people is for your own sake
do what works
do what works like i'm not saying it
because i get anything out of the
equation i'm just saying do what works
look at the data it's what i call the
physics of progress the physics of
progress is basically the scientific
method
recontextualize for business you you
have an informed hypothesis based on
your life then test that [__]
hypothesis by running an experiment
doing something but then look at the
data did this actually move me towards
what i want yes or no
and you have a quote i actually think i
wrote this down let me pull this up
um you said and i quote this is vuci
everybody
don't give me something out of pity i
don't want pity give me something
because i'm the best at what i do
man talk about pushing the car
now what's interesting is as you were
saying it i thought okay what people are
gonna say is
well lucy the the road isn't flat this
is an uphill battle
and i would say that actually isn't true
and the road is malleable and the road
may actually start uphill but the more
you push even if the car rolls back
you're going to learn something and now
the road flattens then you're going to
learn something more and now the road is
going downhill and all of a sudden you
[__] almost can't even keep up
there's so much happening and it's like
i have the chills i want people to
understand that getting good is what
matters get good
but people
people take that excuse and they don't
even start pushing the car which is the
thing that freaks me out talk to me
about martial arts
you're going to be worse when you first
start what is it about martial arts that
drew you in and kept you going because
you've said that you you use martial
arts a lot even now yeah
i mean you know my so my my um my dad
my dad did a style of martial arts
called kyokushinkai
and um
and i suppose this little boy trying to
get close to dad i was like well if he's
doing it i'm going to join him
so my dad and i shared this incredible
passion of martial arts and cars right
um
so i kind of get started you know with
my father then he gets gunned down when
i'm 13 years old
and i went through like a year of just
nothing i just i couldn't show up at the
dojo i didn't have it in me
and i did all the things we're talking
about the excuses at the time south
africa had a a particularly high crime
problem
and i was like you know what's the point
you know he has a first degree black
belt who gets attacked he get takes nine
bullets and he's dead anyway why am i
going to this thing called the dojo
right
again excuses valid it really is
but there's no progress
so a year nothing
and then and then i was like i actually
miss it so i went back
it was interesting when i went back it
wasn't the same
i wasn't doing the qatar
to impress the senseis anymore
i was doing the cutter because i wanted
every single movement
to be as close to flawless as i could
get it
it changed my entire perspective so
one of the things that happened you're
gonna love this i'm literally getting
chills thinking about it one of the
things that happened is time
just expanded
so right because we have a very finite
construct of time i'm going to be at the
dojo for an hour
but what happened was that hour be felt
like five hours and sometimes 30 minutes
felt like five
all of a sudden this fixed construct of
time
you know it started to change because my
relationship with what i was doing
changed
so it wasn't just a punch it wasn't just
the qatar i wasn't just i wasn't just
showing up for the emotion i was
embedded in every single part of the
process i was looking for growth for
progress right
i have to tell you that changed my
entire life
so anytime i find myself stuck now
i'm i recognize that the often the
reason i'm stuck is because i'm focusing
on the output and i'm not focusing on my
input right so output i've got to raise
a hundred million rand for my business
output i've got to get 300 growth for
you know in customers output i've got to
get 25 yeah that's all output
but what you got to focus on is input
what are the things i've got to do and
how do i do those things intentionally
deliberately and try to get better every
single time every meeting every impact
conversation with one of my staff
members every engagement with a client
or a potential client every single one
of those things how do i focus on that
moment because actually the output is a
sum total of how those things come about
so when you when you are at the dojo and
you are being graded and you are going
through the process of trying to attain
your black belt or your brown belt
that's what everybody sees is the output
but what actually went in was that
malleable construct of time where you're
trying to perfect every single
movement right do you remember what
happened that made you
switch over to now i'm gonna do this and
try to get perfect
yeah i do um
[Laughter]
yeah so
my
so my um
my my sensei then at the time um
who was also a sifu because he did he
did wing chun
see for claude uh we were kind of you
know having the conversation i was like
you know i want to come back yeah i had
a fish paste
and um
he started giving me chinese philosophy
to read
and i'd never read philosophy before
do you remember what he gave you
i can't remember the book but he would
actually he gave me the first one he
gave me was a was like a poem it was
like a literally an a4 page
and he said to me this is this is uh you
know first bit of philosophy i'm gonna
give you go read this
and then he said um
uh
and just stick it on your wall for like
three months and the opening line says
there can be no denying
kung fu is hard work
then it says
but as with everything in life you get
out of it exactly what you put in
that's that line is still entrenched in
my head even today right
um so he gave me that and for three
months i just if i didn't feel like
going in i just read it over and over
over and over over and over and then you
wake up and you go
and then he started maturing me into
philosophy so then he'd give me
nietzsche or give me somebody else
and what i recognized was that the
masters
didn't actually focus on output
they focused on mastery
right so beethoven didn't focus on how
does he write the greatest symphony of
all time he just worried about the next
note just that next note and making sure
that it was it was melodic harmonic and
it worked right
if you talk to any performer boys too
man is my favorite boy band of all time
but if you listen to a decent voice to
men album i can tell you for free that
they're not focusing on the next song
it's just how do we make this next note
in this next harmony work
right so in today's world i think of
instagram and the world wide web and the
pressure of jeff bezos being worth 200
billion dollars and now every single
entrepreneur is going well i want to be
worth 200 billion dollars is we forget
that he's he's just at a very different
stage of his momentum journey right
and so
you're not you know you're literally to
the power of a thousand away from where
he is
and so you've got to focus on where you
are in that next part of that journey
um and that for me was probably what was
the most incredible part of that part of
learning in my life
man that that line is great i know in
your school you obviously have some sort
of curriculum is there like a a basics
that you run people through for me it's
mindset 101. i want people to know how
to think and how to think about
themselves
what are your sort of core basics
strategy sales leadership
and i start first with leadership
and particularly self-leadership because
that's a big part of the curriculum
nobody talks about so we always think
about leadership we think about the
general
um in the army right the guy who
marshals the truce the master tactician
um you know and i use the word guy very
deliberately because that's the that's
the iconography if i say general go back
to this construct of identity there's
been a picture sold to us of who a
general is right so we've got this alpha
male
um you know kind of square cut hair
um you know marine looking fella who's
like i'm the general and i'm and i'm i'm
the boss i've got all the so that's what
people think about
but i'm more interested in what was that
guy thinking the morning he woke up
knowing he's about to send a hundred
thousand young men and women into the
field of battle and they might not go
home to their families
i'm more interested in that conversation
i'm not interested in how does he show
up i'm interested in what is he telling
himself
because how does he show up is again
outcome it's output we're seeing him
standing on the stage right
but what what what led to that how does
he have so much self belief and how does
he have so much courage
even in the face of adversity how is
this guy still believing we can win the
war
so we focus a lot on leadership self
leadership
breaking down narratives man i cannot
tell you how many stories have people
have in their heads that are deeply
embedded that they're not even aware the
story is there they're not aware that
the script is playing every single day
and so they're living their lives in
autopilot right
um i'll tell you a big one and i work in
the venture space so a particularly big
one in the venture space particularly in
the continent of africa is the idea that
to get a business started i need
somebody to fund me first
so the first thing i say to
entrepreneurs is why
why do you need a funder well you know i
go no you don't need a funder you need a
customer get off your ass make something
go sell it
see get started now you go i got the
little thing i go out and i sell it
somebody pays me a dollar oh okay great
can i do it again sure iterate and
iterate and iterate and before you know
it i've got a thousand dollars in my
bank so did you need money or did you
need a do you need a customer right but
it's narrative it's these stories that
people have told themselves so you know
the question was how's the curriculum
structured first leadership
self-leadership personal leadership how
do you show up to your family
how do you show up to your friends
um
how do you show up to yourself in the
mirror
because you know that moment will come
too right where you do something that
you know is wrong or you fail or you're
not proud of yourself
when you look at you in the mirror what
do you say
right do you give people
words that would be effective
no no so what we do is we actually do an
exercise called so what
so
hey tom you're on impact theory
what would what would your life look
like if
you lost the business you go well you
know it would look like x y and z and i
go and if that's where you were so what
you go well
then i'd be that's where you were so
what
and what happens is
seven or eight so what's later people
get to what is their actual fear
so what
so i'd be poor again and i don't want
that
i remember that
i remember going to bed hungry i don't
want to be poor again oh okay so
actually the reason you work like a dog
and you don't see your kids and you look
you have completely no balance and
you're completely overweight
it's because you're scared of poverty
just face it
now you can look it in the face and say
poverty i'm scared and there's nothing
wrong with admitting that you haven't
conquered that fear just be aware of it
right it can be an incredible motivator
but you have to know that it's there um
so we focus a lot on the so what
technique and i absolutely i've seen
people break down and cry
um you know we had a i'll never forget a
young lady
one of our classes
and the whole conversation was you know
how are things going and she's and it
starts with yeah you know everybody
wears the mask right oh everything's
great business is good no no no and i
said so what's keeping you up at night
well you know i've got this small little
worry uh-huh
and if that happens so what and if that
happens so what and if that happened so
what
and what it actually came down to
was
she was a mother of three she conceived
children very late in her life in a
marital life it was a second marriage
and
she grew up with our parents
and she didn't want to be the mom who
would abandon her kids right because she
knows what that was like
so that was for her
an incredibly scary thing and she was
like i can't i can't have that i can't
do that but what she didn't realize it
was it was holding her back so she
wasn't growing her business she wasn't
going to the next stage because it would
demand more of her and she didn't want
to give that up because of this hidden
fear
so strategy leadership for me is
important and then strategy you just
can't operate in a world and not
understand how to play a chess game it
doesn't work that way
um and you always have to think three
steps ahead of your competitors you've
got to think three steps ahead of your
market
and you've got to do scenario planning
what happens if scenario a happens
scenario b and scenario c
how will i react then
and then as i think this is the most
important skill for any human being to
learn it's the ability to sell
and i i don't know why the ability to
sell
um for some of the strange reason became
like a bad thing you know we started
talking about these used car salesmen
but i was just like well you know you're
selling yourself every day anyway you've
got to sell yourself to your partner
about why they should stay married or in
a relationship with you
you've got to sell yourself to you every
morning about why you're a kick-ass
person right otherwise you really going
to be grumpy because you don't like
yourself
you're selling every every day anyway so
how do we develop a curriculum that
teaches you how to sell in a manner that
is true authentic and enables you to
have an impact in the world right um and
so and so those are the kind of the
three tenets of what we do no man i love
that i love that um
you have a pact with your mom or you did
growing up that i i think is um i'm
going to imagine is part of the
cornerstone of your success which is if
you're going to do anything be the best
which is certainly my obsession tell me
about that that's in terms of things
that i say that that piss people off
that is one of them when i talk about
competing not just with yourself but
like to actually be the best um
how has that served you why why did you
make that pact with your mom
so
so for context so my father dies i'm 13
years old my father gets gunned down
and um my dad was like the uh he was the
main income earner in the house
so that immediately affected our um
how do i say it just it affected us
right
and um
we so the past of south africa's would
come from apartheid
and um
nelson mandela becomes the president the
country gets democratized and then those
of us myself included black people have
a world of opportunities now opened up
to us that we hadn't had previously and
one of those was the ability to go to
school
that had white kids in them because that
wasn't allowed right and one of the
things the government had done is it had
given a far better quality of education
at the white schools and that had like
this terrible level of education of the
black schools because they wanted a
black majority that was not educated so
it would work in the factories to create
cheap labor right
anyway so all of a sudden we can all go
to these white schools now certainly if
your parents can afford it
and um
dad's still alive i get into the white
school because mom and dad can kind of
afford it dad passes away i can't we
can't afford it now
so mom and i are sitting having the
conversation like so you know what are
we gonna do
and my mom said to me she said look
i will raise hell
if they kick you out of the school
but you got to meet me halfway she said
your part is you got to make sure that
you give me sufficient grades that when
i go into the principal's office it's
not even a debate so it's like okay
that's doable then she said no but not
just that she said
everything you do
you've got to be number one
and there was a reason for that too
so when we were doing extracurricular
activities
you had to you have to like buy the kit
you can imagine if you play baseball you
can't just show up in jeans right
there's a kit to wear
and i'm coming from a household single
mother five kids
there is no money for the kid
so my mom went
if you are gonna do it
make sure that you're number one at it
otherwise you're literally taking food
away from the table this is money we
could spend buying food and you said was
you want to play the violin which i do
i'm gonna buy you the violin but
recognize that that's that means no meat
for the next three months now right
you say you want to do karate absolutely
well not recognize that if i buy you a
ghee that means no bread for the next
week right so there was always this very
real
real life sacrifice it wasn't just you
know so when the other kids are showing
up to just do the extra uh curricular
activity i'm like hang on i've gotta
suck every single second out of this
because you know this is we've
sacrificed a lot for this so that was my
pack mom and i you do it
number one i can't tell you how many
times if i came number two it became a
discussion for the whole [__] week
man like god i heard you i came number
two it was a mistake she says nah you
came number two at the public speaking
thing you better make sure you're coming
number one at the next one right so you
know my mom would be at work she'd come
home and i'm in the in the room studying
and she's like have you done your cutter
yeah mom i've done my
all right how many hours you're putting
into the study oh i've got one more hour
to go all right when you go are you
doing a public speaking thing cool oh
and by the way have you done your chores
have you washed the dishes have you
ironed your shirt have you polished your
shoes it was just like this like narrow
focus on small minor tasks but it was
always such a meticulous focus so my mom
wasn't polish your shoes it was other
other shoes shining it wasn't just iron
your shirt it was make sure that it's
crisp and the color is nicely ironed in
so i learned this amazing thing about
detail just like and love the process
man you're writing a 60 page business
plan enjoy page four like you're going
to get to pay 65 you know page 55 just
enjoy page four you're building a
business enjoy month one you'll get to
year five but just enjoy month one right
um that pact
changed my life by the way she still
does it to me today if i
lose something or now i don't even tell
her it's just like you know just don't
tell me because i'm going to tell you
about it
do you resent your mom at all because i
i think when i hear that story it fills
me with so much joy and excitement uh
but i think a lot of people will hear
that and
think that it sounds tyrannical or cruel
so what what is your emotional
relationship like with your mom
remember though that her approach
is
um
her approach is a mental and an
institutional reverence for my skill
it's not a reprimand there's a big
difference so she's not saying you're
not competent she's saying do you know
how competent you are why are you only
this does that make sense oh yeah it's a
big difference somebody going well you
got 90 you suck and somebody going you
got 90 but you're capable of a 95.
where's the other five percent
right okay well here are the things you
need to do get me the other five percent
so then it's a it's a it's a oh you
believe in me oh wow like oh wow that's
cool right so i got to tell my venture
firm we just won the 2020 best impact
investment firm in africa
congratulations huge deal
i know like 55 different countries
and i'm just like wait
what
i remember when i first got into the
space eight nine years ago first as an
angel investor
again conversation right people were
going aren't you that speaker guy why
are you doing deals why are you
investing in stuff why are you you
shouldn't even be in this room
and then you know then all of a sudden
you start talking about shareholders
agreements and term sheets and people go
oh okay so you understand a bit of the
lingo now oh okay but aren't you that
speaker guy yeah cause there's a frame
and you put me in that frame right the
only way out of that was me constantly
reminding myself that if i don't win at
whatever i'm doing next i'm gonna have
to have a hell of a conversation with my
mom
so this year when we win the award i
went i went to mom and i was like check
this out mom you know now number one of
the continent right so
it's a i think it's an incredible gift
to have somebody that believes in you
especially when you don't believe in
yourself
yeah church on that one man tell me
about mandela i know you met him a few
times
um yeah what what was he like
like when you're right there with him
man
there are some people
who have the ability to bend the laws of
physics
now i don't mean that thematically i
mean literally bend the laws of physics
right
nelson mandela had this most incredible
ability if you walked into the room the
temperature changed by three degrees
celsius it just dropped
your skin all of a sudden you know like
just broke out into like chicken skin
and you were just like oh my what's
going on and you could feel the hairs at
the back of your of your neck stand up
so
i'm 17 i've just won the world
championship in public speaking
we get a letter from the foundation
inviting me to go and meet him
so
i get to the office right and his
assistant comes to meet me at reception
takes me to his study
and she offers me something to drink and
my mother said if you get there and they
offer you something to drink
ask them for tea not coffee
i was like that's odd so i was like why
she said well because tea is high tea
coffee is common yeah tea is for the
bourjois people okay kuma so i get there
and she asks me for something to drink
and i ask her for some tea she brings me
this tea
and i'm sitting to drink my cup right
but every time i pick it up and tilt it
my hand is shaking
so it spills a little bit on the saucer
just like man i put the cup down and
every time i pick up the cup it keeps
spilling and then spilling on my shirt
and i'm like well this doesn't work
so i stopped picking the cup up and i
started leaning in to like drink it
right
and i'm hoping that he doesn't walk in
whilst i'm like leaning in like a kid
trying to steal you know milk from the
fridge or something that's like i'm
hoping
so i'm sitting drinking and then i heard
a
where is he
oh my god and my skin's fussy i'm like
oh man that's him that's him
and he walks to the study he opens the
door
he takes two steps forward tom
opens up his arms like this and he says
my son
come here
and um
nobody had called me my son since the
death of my father
i can feel like these tears are just
about to start running down my throat my
eyes
i jump up give him a big hug
and we sit down
i'm a fairly big guy i'm 6'2
i weigh 108 kilograms i'm not sure what
that is in pounds right so i'm a fairly
big i can hold my own right but next to
him i was a dwarf because he was like
six four six five
i'm a size i'm a size 11 shoe he was a
size 14. he was a tank
yeah like most people actually don't
talk about this side of nelson mandela
he was
a physical giant right
so we're sitting down and we're chatting
and all i'm doing is i'm just asking
questions asking questions asking
questions
and we get to like 55 minutes into what
is an hour meeting and he looks at me
and he says
you know
they said
you're a speaker
and i said uh yes data which is a
possible word for granddad and he goes
but man
you have not spoken
so you know your question was so how was
he um
he had this incredible ability to make
you feel
welcome
but you always knew that you were in the
company of greatness i've met him twice
in both times you just always knew you
were in the company
of greatness there was just no doubt in
your mind about it
but for me what came out of that meeting
was
i remember he i said to him i said to
him what's your dream for like mankind
what's your dream for humanity right
towards the end of the meeting and he
looks at me and he says
what we need is a little bit of faith
so it was like faith it's such a strange
thing to say i was like what what what
what is faith i asked him like what's
faith and he said
faith is the ability to see the
invisible
believe in the impossible
and trust in the unknown
so i'm just like wow cops met
and it's only as i've grown older that i
realize what he was actually saying
which is it's the ability to make
manifest that which is not yet
and i think a lot of us are living in a
world today
where unless we can see it touch it or
feel it we don't believe it to be
and we forget that everything you can
see touch taste
was imagined by someone created by
someone who had to have faith
that it would find resonance with
mankind i think it's
we have a duty today to understand the
power of what that means
man just give me the chills again
yeah that
what he did and represents is so
extraordinary
i heard you say something
that i found really interesting so you
said given what mandela had done for us
it's given us this
belief in
that there's someone coming to save us
and you said there is no messiah
nobody's coming to save you i mean we
have to do it ourselves
talk to me a little bit about that i
think that that's powerful there's
there's both that like i have that same
pull towards somebody like mandela where
you know you just want that big bear hug
from somebody who really seems to have
[__] figured out um yeah and then the
fact that i have to save myself
so
so i think it's you know it's part of
the course of the universe
that
once in a couple of generations a nelson
mandela is born right i mean it's you
know nelson mandela mlk
um
these incredible people who step up
but one of the things you learn as you
study their history
is that they were human
they had hopes and dreams just like you
and i they had doubts too right
and the minute you figure that out you
then understand that actually nothing
separates them from you
but for the fact that you're waiting for
someone like them to show up
and so the question i always ask is
so if we're all waiting for the messiah
who is it because it we can't all wait
somebody has to step up
and then the recognition that actually
if you read history
um
communities generally save themselves
right there's no single person that does
it so we talk about nelson mandela but
the truth is nelson mandela led a
collective of people
who fought for the liberation of my
country right
he was he was the halo right that was
evangelized so we could create a single
narrative about freeing black people in
south africa
but actually there were millions like
him
who made others even an ultimate
sacrifice with their lives right
and so when once you start realizing
that you go oh but hold on this was
actually a collective effort which means
you and me have a duty to become a part
of the collective effort of whatever
freedom that we're seeking
so if you're waiting for someone to save
you
you're it
you are the savior you are and and by
the way
you don't have to have it figured out so
you know most people go well let me
figure it out first right it's what i
call the mba approach let me go to
school get an mba
then i'll start a business
no just
as you go you will figure it out and
you've got to trust the universe it'll
meet you halfway it'll teach you what
you need to learn it'll bring into your
world an intersection of people
knowledge spaces where you can grow your
own competence and ability you don't
have to be ready
for where you're going you just have to
be ready for what's next
and and the universe will meet you
halfway and that's what i mean by
there's no messiah we all kind of go
well we need the perfect person so we
can create the perfect future but what
you're learning is there is no perfect
person for the perfect future there's
the person who's just working on next
step and that's all it is just
next step the wright brothers only
figured out the next step steve jobs
only figured out the next step so once
you get that right you go oh okay so i
actually don't need the perfect person
to come and save me i can do it myself
brother i love the way you think man i
love it where can people find out more
about you i think they need to to spend
time with you and your ideas
so love man at vuci tembego the full
word on all the social medias i'm on ig
i'm on linkedin
uh twitter and of course on youtube i
published a lot of my material there and
i love this like this current stage of
my life i feel like
it's so interesting i feel like the
grand master who's a student
you know what that means so i'm just
like oh wow i know so much and then i'd
read something and i go oh wow i know
nothing
and then you you know you're just like
next stage next phase
and and every time i'm interacting with
what i know i'm educated even more
because i think collective intelligence
is so much more powerful so yeah i'm on
all of the socials hit me up i'd love to
chat love it man all right guys this is
definitely somebody that you're going to
want to follow this man is amazing
uh and speaking of amazing things if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
and enough people have said yes now
you know to to now impact eight and a
half million lives but boy if i could
count the no's i mean there's tens of
thousands of notes that we've all heard
over the last decade
you